%-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
% CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
%-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\section{Conclusion and Future Work} \label{concl}

We have seen that the problem involves more bifurcation scenarios than
anticipated. We want to finish with the discussion on further improvements and
future work. The abovementioned more complicated crossing at the saddle-node
needs further refinement of the states of the continuation algorithm. An exact
comparison to the MATLAB code at a higher resolution would be required to
clarify the issue. Nevertheless, it seems that the Hopf bifurcation and
pitchfork $P_3$ can be seen independent of the problem arising at the
saddle-node. 

Another possible future investigation is related to the symmetries of the
cavity. Using a square cavity and having the four lid's velocities changing at
the same time means that we are varying 4 Reynolds numbers simultaneously. From
a geometrical point of view, that reflects that we are moving on a line in a
four-dimensional space of the four Reynolds numbers that could be varied.

To get a better picture of what is happening, one could break the symmetries of
the problem and impose different velocities at the four lids and thus different
Reynolds numbers. This could separate the dense scenario of eigenvalues near
the saddle-node.

Moreover, we have always worked with the regularized version to be sure of the
convergence rate for our pseudo-spectral discretization. It could be
interesting to see if one can reproduce the periodic orbits and the secondary
branch and compare the critical Reynolds numbers in the discontinuous case.
Conversely, \citet{chen2013} used a finite difference discretization. With the
pseudo-spectral approach, it is certainly not guaranteed to get a useful
approximation of the original boundary conditions. Another strategy is trying
the spectral approach on the un-regularized version and seeing how the
convergence rates and results are affected.

Lastly, it has to be mentioned that there is another eigenvalue crossing
happening close to the pitchfork $P_2$ at the unstable base solution. This
phenomenon was not investigated in this study but could suggest a more complex
picture of the bifurcation scenario at $P_2$.

In terms of implementation, the Julia module could be further extended. For
now, the continuation algorithm and the linear stability analysis results are
saved using a CSV format, and the values of the streamfunctions at the grid
points are stored in plain text files. A further optimization could be to save
results as binaries in an HDF5 format directly. This could easily be done with
a package called \emph{JLD.jl} and would probably reduce the code size and
simplify the results handling. Another improvement worse mentioning is that the
code is divided into the core functions explained in section \ref{sec:impl} ant
into the code necessary to run the simulations and generate the plots. The
Julia module only includes the core functions mentioned in the implementation
section for readability. It could be beneficial to have both parts reconciled,
and the binary savings of results would greatly help. \\

In conclusion, this master project focused on the four-sided lid-driven cavity
flow using regularized boundary conditions. The study's spectral Chebyshev
discretization technique combined with the regularization yields highly
accurate results having an exponential convergence rate as the grid size
increases. We have seen that the RC4F exhibits a wide variety of bifurcation
scenarios. The regularized version recovers the asymmetric branches of the
problem with discontinuous boundary conditions. The original bifurcations have
been detected, namely the two pitchforks of the base flow and the saddle-node
of the un-regularized version. Further, in the regularized version, a Hopf
bifurcation of the asymmetric solution branch was found at a Reynolds number of
$348.319$. Additionally, a third pitchfork occurs close to the saddle-node at
$353.347$ in Reynolds. The connected unstable branch breaks the $\pi$-rotation
symmetry of the asymmetric solutions. On the other hand, for the saddle-node
bifurcation, further investigation is required due to an unclear eigenvalue
crossing, possibly associated with a complex conjugate pair. The presence of
three pitchfork bifurcations and the Hopf bifurcation in this problem offers
robust scenarios to benchmark a Navier-Stokes solver. The regularized
four-sided lid-driven cavity only requires slight adaptations from the
classical one-sided version, making it easily applicable to existing codes.
This modified setup allows for testing the multiplicity of states and periodic
orbits at low to moderate Reynolds numbers provide the means to assess a
solver's capability in identifying these solution types and the oscillatory
behavior. In general, it can make up for an interesting bifurcation benchmark.
